How Pick and Omit Utility Types Help Keep TypeScript Code DRY
Introduction
In TypeScript, developers often work with large interfaces that contain many properties. However, not every part of an application needs all of those properties. Creating separate interfaces manually for different use cases can lead to repetitive code and make maintenance difficult.
To solve this problem, TypeScript provides utility types such as Pick and Omit. These utility types allow developers to create smaller and specialized “slices” of a master interface without rewriting code. This helps keep the code DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself), clean, and easier to maintain.

What Is Pick?
The Pick utility type creates a new type by selecting specific properties from an existing interface.
Syntax
Pick<Type, Keys>
Example of Pick
interface User {    id: number;    name: string;    email: string;    password: string;}type UserProfile = Pick<User, "id" | "name" | "email">;
In this example, UserProfile only contains:


id


name


email


The password property is excluded automatically.
This prevents duplication because there is no need to create another interface manually with the same fields.

What Is Omit?
The Omit utility type creates a new type by removing specific properties from an existing interface.
Syntax
Omit<Type, Keys>
Example of Omit
interface User {    id: number;    name: string;    email: string;    password: string;}type PublicUser = Omit<User, "password">;
Here, PublicUser contains all properties except password.
This is useful when sensitive or unnecessary data should not be exposed.

How Pick and Omit Prevent Code Duplication
Without utility types, developers may create multiple similar interfaces manually.
Without Utility Types
interface User {    id: number;    name: string;    email: string;    password: string;}interface UserProfile {    id: number;    name: string;    email: string;}
This approach repeats the same property definitions. If the original User interface changes later, developers must update every related interface manually.

With Utility Types
interface User {    id: number;    name: string;    email: string;    password: string;}type UserProfile = Pick<User, "id" | "name" | "email">;
Now the specialized type automatically stays synchronized with the main interface.
This reduces repetition and improves maintainability.

How They Keep Code DRY
The DRY (Don’t Repeat Yourself) principle means avoiding unnecessary repetition in code.
Pick and Omit help maintain DRY code by:


Reusing existing interfaces


Reducing repeated property definitions


Keeping related types consistent


Making updates easier and safer


Improving readability and maintainability


When the master interface changes, all derived types update automatically, reducing the chance of bugs and inconsistencies.

Conclusion
Pick and Omit are powerful TypeScript utility types that help developers create specialized versions of interfaces without rewriting code. Pick selects only the needed properties, while Omit removes unwanted ones.
By creating reusable “slices” of a master interface, these utility types prevent code duplication and help maintain the DRY principle. As a result, TypeScript code becomes cleaner, easier to maintain, and more scalable.